[FLINK-39708][table] Support TO_CHANGELOG retract/upsert stream -> upsert stream with set semantics (#28199)
apache/flink: docs/content/docs/sql/reference/queries/changelog.md

Prefer row semantics, when possible. `PARTITION BY` is only necessary when downstream operators are keyed on that column and you want to co-locate rows for the same key in the same parallel operator instance.

#### Avoiding ChangelogNormalize for upsert sources

> When the input is an upsert source (emits `UPDATE_AFTER` but no `UPDATE_BEFORE`), the planner inserts a `ChangelogNormalize` operator by default to materialize `UPDATE_BEFORE` rows and complete `DELETE` payloads. This operator is stateful and can be expensive. When `PARTITION BY` is provided, the planner skips `ChangelogNormalize` if `op_mapping` does not emit the corresponding kinds:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a query includes an upsert source input (emits `UPDATE_AFTER` but no `UPDATE_BEFORE`), the planner typically inserts a `ChangelogNormalize` operator to materialize `UPDATE_BEFORE` rows and complete `DELETE` payloads. This operator is stateful and can be expensive. 
By wrapping the upsert source input in a properly configured `TO_CHANGELOG` function, we can avoid the `ChangelogNormalize` operator. For this, the function's table input requires a `PARTITION BY` and an `op_mapping` that does not emit the corresponding kinds:
```

I would rephase this a bit and make clear that this is in the context of the `TO_CHANGELOG` function.

Reviewer: I wonder if this argument isn't a bit misleading. We "promise" that users can avoid `ChangelogNormatlize` by using `TO_CHANGELOG` but don't explain what it really means. 
They would need to "manually" handle all changes because Flink only sees an append-only stream.
So it is certainly not a silver bullet and only applicable in a few cases that allow for manual change handling (which most users won't be able to do, IMO). 

So isn't this more like an escape hatch for expert users?
If so, it should be clearly positioned as such, IMO.

Author: I think you have a point. In the future, when we support state, the idea is that both to and from changelog can indeed replace ChangelogNormalize in some cases. I think it's currently not the case and can be misleading and not easy for them to understand. I'll remove this whole section for now and give it a go again when we eventually add state support.

* Omit `UPDATE_BEFORE` from `op_mapping` to skip `UPDATE_BEFORE` materialization.

> * If the source emits partial `DELETE` events (only the keys flow through, common with Flink's `upsert-kafka` connector or other key-compacted topics), it's necessary to omit `DELETE` from `op_mapping` to skip the full-`DELETE` materialization step that also happens in `ChangelogNormalize`.

Reviewer 2: I think, this is way to detailed for the Flink user. I think if the user wants to partition their data on a specific key they do it and if they don't they will a just avoid using parition by clause

Author: I agree this is advanced but I wanted to have this information somewhere and can't think of a better place yet - maybe a new session called performance optimization at the bottom? So people only get to it if necessary. I can imagine advanced users wanting to tune their jobs to not have ChangelogNormalize and this explains how

Author: I'll remove the whole section https://github.com/apache/flink/pull/28199#discussion_r3273271114

> * If the source emits partial `DELETE` events (only the keys flow through, common with Flink's `upsert-kafka` connector or other key-compacted topics), it's necessary to omit `DELETE` from `op_mapping` to skip the full-`DELETE` materialization step that also happens in `ChangelogNormalize`.

Reviewer: isn't it a bit unintuitive to support partial deletes by not declaring a `DELETE` key in the map?
The function would still emit deletes (partial, not full) although they aren't configured.
Or am I misunderstanding something?

Author: I'll remove the whole section https://github.com/apache/flink/pull/28199#discussion_r3273271114
